$\def\C{ \mathbf{C} }$
$\def\cat#1{ \mathbf{#1} }$
$\def\domain#1{ \mathrm{dom}(#1) }$
$\def\o{\circ}$
$\def\cmp{\circ}$


# 1.7 CATEGORIES: PRODUCTS, COPRODUCTS, AND FREE OBJECT

* Several of mathematical objects A already introduced (sets, groups, monoids) (rings, modules) with the appropriate maps of these objects (set:functions, groups:homomorphisms) have a number of formal properties in common.
* For example, composition of maps is associative; each object A has an identity map $1_A :A -> A$ with certain properties.

* DEF Category is a class $\cat{C}$ of objects (A,B,C) with
  * (i) class of disjoint sets, $hom(A,B)$, one for each pair of objects in $\cat{C}$
    * morphism: is $f \in hom(A,B)$  $f:A->B$
  * (ii) for each triple $(A,B,C)$ from $\cat{C}$ a function
    * composition of morphism: $hom(B,C) \times hom(A,B) -> hom(A,C)$ 
      * $f:A->B$, $g:B->C$ $g \circ f$
    * subject to axioms 
    * Associative: for  $f,g, h:C->D$ 
      * $h \o ( g \o f ) = (h \o g) \o f $
    * Identity: for each B of $\cat{C}$ there exists morphism $1_B:B->B$ s.t.
      * for any $f:A->B g:B->A$, 
        * $1_B \cmp f = f$ and $g \cmp 1_B = g$


  * NOTES:
    * The morphism defines some relationship that must be preserved transitively
    * The morphism also forms the basis for defining equivalence

* DEF a morphism $f$ is __equivalence__ if there is $g$ such that $g \cmp f=1_A$ and $f \cmp  g=1_B$
  * the composite of two equivalences, when defined, is an equivalence
  * if $f:A->B$ is an equivalence, then $A$ and $B$ are __equivalent__

* Let's carefully think about what $1_A$ means 
  * is it the same as an atypical identity? or  are there some restrictions?

* these symbols are kind of frustrating me haha
* Why is the ordering of the hom(A,B) and but the composition is written the other way?
  * hom read right, composition read left



* DEF Product: Given a family of objects $\{A_i | i\in I\}$ a product, $P$, is an object with $\pi_i : P \rightarrow A_i$ 
  * so that for any other object, $B$, with mappings to the family $\psi_i: B \rightarrow A_i$ 
  * there is unique $f: B \rightarrow P$ with $\pi_i \circ f = \psi_i$
  * $P \rightarrow A_i \leftarrow B$
  * $f:B \rightarrow P$

* THM two product of the same family are equivalent
>! * consider two products P,B and $f:B \rightarrow A$
>! * we need to show $f \circ g = 1$ and $g \circ f = 1$ 
>!   * $f \circ g$ and $1$ both satisfy link function of commuting the family mapping from P to P
>!     * since the link function is unique, they are equal. This means f is inverse of g
>!     * so the two products are equivalent
>! * draw out the diagram, it is quite interesting how you can put the two $P \rightarrow A_i \leftarrow B$ maps together to form 
>! * ??? What does it mean for comm diagram to commute?
* DEF Coproduct/Sum: Same definition as Product except the mappings to family and link mapping are reversed
  * $S \leftarrow A_i \rightarrow B$
  * with unique $f:S \rightarrow B$
  * examples:
    * The direct sum definition in linear algebra says that the sum must have unique representation or sum of vector subspaces whose intersection is zero
* DEF F is Free on X if 
  * $F \leftarrow X \rightarrow B$
  * with unique $f:S \rightarrow B$
* THM two co products of same family are equivalent
* DEF initial element: Let $I$ be an initial element, then for any other object $O$, there is unique morphism from $I \rightarrow O$
* DEF terminal element
* initial/terminal property is what you need to say any two initial/terminal objects are equivalent

* EXAMPLE Deconstruction of Free object into an initial object
  * The morphism from $f:F \rightarrow O$ such that $f \circ i = j$ is unique
  * So, can we build a category where I and O where f is the mapping between them?
  * NOTE: I like this exercise a building something that will fit a certain defintion/property
    * I like it becaause its making the more complex space simpler (a morphism in our new space means the commute relationship must hold automatically)
* EXAMPLE Deconstruction of Product into an initial object
* Can you build something similar for Products and Coproducts


# Exercises
* ??? Are there any interesting exercises in particular? that illustrates an interesting point?
* DEF pointed sets
* 2. Inverse of equivalent morphism is unique
* 3. Deriving a unique morphism for product of group
  * we describe f that commutes $\pi_i \circ f = f_i$
  * is f a morphism of groups? is it unique?
* 4. Same as #3 but for coproduct of group
* 5. Construct a coproduct of sets
* 6. Construct a 
  * product for pointed sets
  * coproduct for pointed sets
* 7. The properties of a Free object can force i to be injective because it is linked to the other object
* 8.

# Questions To Teach
* What is the definition of category
  * what is the homomorphisms
  * transitive
  * equivalence
  * identity?
  * What is the point of this defintion, what is it trying to capture?
* ??? What are products in a category?
  * Could you find an example of one for sets?
  * What is coproduct
  * What are free objects?
  * What are initial/terminal objects?
  * What is the relationship between product/coproduct/free/initial/terminal objects
  * Is there relationship between a initial object and a terminal object



